A red curtain slowly opens. Rows of little screens,
showing people of all ages and colors, fill the stage
against a dark background. In the center appears a
man. He soon begins conducting and disappears.
Then the singing images move slowly to the music.
Some of them are zoomed in to show different
faces. There is neither an orchestra nor an audience.
The singers have never met each other or practiced
together. Yet a song called "Lux Aurumque" is
performed by a beautiful mix of voices. This is a
"virtual choir."
The virtual choir was Eric Whitacre's idea. One day in
2009, the modern music composer was told by a
friend about a young fan. She had videoed herself
singing the soprano part of his composition "Sleep"
and posted it for him online. In the video, her voice
sounded sweet and pure. Inspired by the video,
Whitacre decided to make a virtual choir. He
thought, "If I can get 50 people to sing their parts
and post their videos, I can put them together and
create something beautiful Those who love to sing
don't have to be in the same place to perform a
choral work together." Whitacre soon sent out a call
to his online fans to record themselves singing and
upload their videos.
To make his idea a reality, Whitacre went through
several steps. First, he asked the fans to download
his work "Lux Aurumque." Then he posted a video
where he conducted along with piano music. The
singers watched the video and learned their parts on
their own. Soon 185 singers from 12 countries
uploaded their videos. Thanks to the help of Scott
Haines, a participant who offered to edit the work,
the videos were put together into a single
performance.
After months of hard work, this first virtual choir
performance was released in March 2010. Whitacre
felt strong emotions about the video. "I was actually
moved to tears when I first saw it These souls, all
on their own desert island, sent electronic messages
in bottles to each other," he said. Little did he know
that people would go to any length to connect with
each other, no matter where they were. The virtual
choir was a marriage of art, connectivity, and
technology.
A little later, singers posted stories about their
experiences. One singer said, "My sister and I used
to sing in choirs together when we were younger.
We now live in different parts of the world. Without
the virtual choir, we wouldn't have been able to sing
together again and renew our bond." Another said,
"When I told my husband that I was going to do
this, he told me that I didn't have the voice for it.
But I wanted to participate despite what he said. I
live in the Great Alaskan Bush, far away from
everyone. The virtual choir is what connects me with
the world. Being part of this choir is as good as
meeting old friends." Many others appreciated the
experience, saying it was great to know they were
part of a worldwide community of people. Some
even met each other in person and became friends.
The virtual choir idea has continued to grow since
that first performance. Thousands of people have
participated in several big projects. One of them was
the 2013 performance of "Fly to Paradise." It was
shown at Buckingham Palace to mark Elizabeth II's
60th year as Queen of the UK. It contained about
8,400 videos from 101 different countries. Also
among the projects was the performance by a virtual
youth choir. It featured 2,292 young singers from 80
countries, including four from Korea. These singers
again showed how technology could be used to
bring people together.
Perhaps you can take part in the next virtual choir. It
could be a great way to connect with our global
village.
One morning, Mark Johnson, a producer and movie director, was on his way to his studio and stopped to listen to a street musician.
He realized that the greatest music is not in the studio but on the street.
That morning, he decided to bring the recording studio to the street.
He joined forces with dancer and actress Whitney Kroenke and started a project called “Playing for Change.”
They have traveled the world with a mobile studio and recorded street musicians in the places where they worked.
"Johnson and Kroenke hope that “Playing for Change” can make the world a better
place to live in through music."
They help set up music schools that offer free lessons.
"They do this because they know that learning to make music takes resources, teachers, and instruments, which are not always easy to find in the developing
world."
Even more importantly, they help break down barriers between people by inspiring and connecting the world through music.
