French fries, which are often served with fast foods,
are one of the best known American side dishes. It
is said that Thomas Jefferson, the third President of
the United States, tasted these fried potatoes in
France and brought the recipe home to America. The
real inventors of the so-called “French” fries were not
the French but the Belgians. Instead of French fries,
the French have traditionally enjoyed roasted
potatoes with chicken for their Sunday lunch. Potato
pancakes and potato soups are popular traditional
dishes in Germany, while fish and chips is one of the
most popular street foods in England.
The potato has become such an important part of
Western food culture that it is hard to believe that it
has had such a relatively short history in Europe. The
potato has been grown by South American Indians in
the Andes Mountains for nearly 10,000 years, but it
was only 500 years ago when the Europeans learned
about this vegetable and brought it to their
homelands.
At first, Europeans did not like this unfamiliar and
alien food. Most people thought potatoes looked too
ugly for people to eat. Some even believed that
potatoes were created by devils. For this reason,
potatoes were most often given to animals, while
people ate them only when there was nothing else
to eat. The potato gradually but steadily spread
across Europe, as people learned how it could help
them in times of war, bad weather, and desperate
hunger.
Hunger was a common part of everyday life in 17thand 18th-century Europe. The average European not
only often went hungry, but sometimes even starved
to death. Many countries suffered nationwide famines
at least once every decade.
The potato changed all that. Not only did potatoes
grow well in much of Europe, but they were also
very nutritious. Once Europeans began to grow
potatoes, their food supplies doubled in quantity and
increased dramatically in quality. Throughout Europe,
potatoes quickly became the main source of nutrition
for the majority of common people. By the end of
the 18th century, potatoes had taken over most
European farms, and famine had become a rare and
unusual incident. At long last, Europe was able to
feed itself.
Thanks to the fact that the potato was inexpensive
and nutritious, many Europeans escaped famines, and
the populations in European nations increased rapidly
during the 19th century. Furthermore, the potato
indirectly led to the Industrial Revolution in 19th
century England. It was easier to grow potatoes than
many other crops, so fewer people were needed for
farming. People who no longer worked on farms
came to the cities and became factory workers, which enabled new manufacturing industries to grow more
quickly. With the larger populations and more
advanced technologies, European nations became
powerful enough to venture into other parts of the
world and colonize them.
The impact of the potato in Europe was not entirely
positive. It was much more complicated. Because the
people of Ireland were excessively dependent upon
the potato for food, when a potato disease hit
Europe in 1845, it led to a disastrous situation. Many
countries were affected, but Ireland suffered the
most. In two months, the disease wiped out almost
half of the potato crop in Ireland. The situation
continued to worsen. By 1852, more than one million
Irish people, about 20 percent of the population, had
starved to death, while another two million people
had fled Ireland, and almost three-quarters of them
had migrated to the United States. It was one of the
deadliest famines in history.
The Beginning of the Modern Pesticides
Despite the terrible outcome of the potato disease in
Europe, it was perhaps less important in the potato’s
history than the Colorado potato beetle was in North
America. In the 1860s, the potato beetle was carried
by horses and cows from Mexico to the state of
Colorado in the United States.
There it attacked potatoes and spread quickly when
potatoes were shipped to other parts of the country
on trains and steamships. Until that time, American
farmers had only planted a few varieties of potatoes,
and the potatoes that they planted were extremely
vulnerable to the pest. As a result, farmers were
practically defenseless against this pest. After a series
of desperate attempts, one man eventually found
that Paris green, a toxic chemical used for making
green paint, killed the beetles. Soon farmers were
spraying it on their potatoes. Farmers were not the
only people to find a new use for Paris green.
Chemists saw what the farmers were doing and
decided to try Paris green on other pests. They then
decided to try other chemicals for other problems.
Scientists began to do research and discover
chemicals and substances that were effective for
many different agricultural problems. That was the
beginning of the modern pesticide industry.
Often, the course of history is changed by seemingly
insignificant things. In this case, it was changed by
the potato. The potato changed Europe first by
freeing the European people from hunger. It then
went on to prepare the ground for the Industrial
Revolution, the rise of the European empires, and
new techniques in farming. As a result, this simple
vegetable, which was once unwanted and thought to
be ugly, has shaped the modern world as we know
it.